Term of office of Vice-President. —The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years ​ from the date on which he enters upon his office: Provided that— (a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office; (b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution; (c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office. 68. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy. —(1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term. (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 67, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. 69. Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President. —Every Vice-President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say— “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”. 70. Discharge of President's functions in other contingencies. Parliament may make such provisions as it thinks fit for the discharge of the functions of the President in any contingency not provided for in this Chapter. [ 7 ] [ 71. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President or Vice-President. —(1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final. (2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-President, as the case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration. (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a President or Vice-President. (4) The election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be called in question on the ground ​ of the existence of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral college electing him.]